<TEXT>The Shining Path does not intend to seek 
reconciliation in the country, has disarmed itself neither 
militarily nor ideologically, and is instead trying to become a 
semi-legal party operating as a shock force against the 
opposition, subversion specialist Carlos Tapia has said. 
  Tapia emphasized that the Shining Path faction led by 
Abimael 
Guzman Reinoso enjoys government favor, and among other things 
has been given assistance in organizing a second party congress. 
  He said that imprisoned Shining Path members of the 
Guzman-led faction, such as Edmundo Cox Beuzeville, have been 
allowed to tour several prisons and to promote debates to 
support the proposal of so-called President Gonzalo. 
  Tapia said: "The Shining Path was defeated, but it seems 
that after the beginning of negotiations, Abimael Guzman's 
leadership has been consolidated, tied to the commitment to 
organize a second party congress." 
  "The documents of this second congress are being prepared to 
make the Shining Path stop engaging in armed actions. It is 
true that armed actions will end, but no one knows when. A new, 
stronger Shining Path could reemerge later for a second 
beginning, and as a weapon for fighting popular movements...," 
Tapia said. 
  He added that peace negotiations between the Shining Path 
and the government are being held behind the country's back. 
  Tapia believes the government is seeking to strengthen 
Abimael Guzman's leadership within Shining Path, countering the 
hardline faction led by Alberto Ramirez Durand, aka "Feliciano." 
  Guzman's faction, Tapia said, represents the imprisoned 
Shining Path, while the one led by "Feliciano" is made up of the 
terrorists who are still free. "They are the ones who plant the 
bombs," he said. For his part, ex-leftist Senator Enrique 
Bernales has said that the Guzman group is trying to sell itself 
in order to eventually gain its freedom and later regroup. 
  Tapia and Bernales made these statements during an interview 
on the "En Directo" program hosted by Alfredo Barnechea on 
Channel 9. 
  The statements were made in the wake of a letter that 
Shining 
Path member Edmundo Cox addressed to Colonel Gabino Cajahuanca, 
the director of the Miguel Castro Castro prison, asking him for 
an audience "to inform you about what we have done." 
  Cox was referring to the meetings he held with imprisoned 
Shining Path members in other prisons of the country to support 
the peace proposal by Guzman Reinoso, against the faction led by 
"Feliciano." 
  Carlos Tapia, who is a careful observer of the subversion 
phenomenon, believes that the Shining Path does not seek 
national reconciliation, and that it maintains its ideological 
positions, such as "hatred of classes" and its stand against the 
"legal leftist sector, human rights organizations, popular 
unions, and nongovernmental organizations." 

</TEXT>

</DOC>

