<TEXT>Article by Verica Rudar: "What Is Ljubljana's Message for Belgrade?"
   In the view of Yugoslav diplomats, the 
normalization of relations between Slovenia and the Federal 
Republic of Yugoslavia will certainly be a strenuous and 
long-term project. Although the establishment of communications 
between Ljubljana and Belgrade would be very important for the 
situation in the former Yugoslavia in general, the chances that 
this could happen soon are minimal. 
  A signal that relations between Yugoslavia and Slovenia 
might be reconsidered came this time from the Slovene capital. 
According to information published in the Yugoslav newspapers, 
the Slovene Government could be addressing this issue soon. The 
establishing of relations between the two states, the exchange 
of diplomatic representatives, and the abolition of the visa 
requirement for Yugoslav citizens are some of the topics to be 
considered. This information has not been denied and, apart 
from that, it is the logical conclusion to a series of 
statements issued by Slovene politicians, which pointed to a 
change in relations toward Belgrade. 
  The announcement about the normalization of relations were 
also supported by information that an official Slovene 
delegation had arrived in Belgrade for this purpose, but it was 
stated that the details cannot yet be published since the matter 
is very delicate. 
  The FRY Ministry of Foreign Affairs is denying that any 
official Slovene delegation came to Belgrade. It is stated that 
this is rather a visit of businessmen, since these contacts have 
not been interrupted. It is assumed in the Federal Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs that Slovene businessmen might even be checking 
the atmosphere for possible political contacts, but there have 
been no official statements about it. Commercial contacts
  The signals from the Slovene side are being received in 
Yugoslavia with reservations. One could even say with distrust. 
  Yugoslav diplomats point out that Yugoslavia has not been 
officially recognized by Slovenia. It is also true that 
Slovenia does not accept Yugoslavia on the international scene. 
Yugoslav sources claim that Slovenia is becoming increasingly 
isolated because of its extreme policy toward Yugoslavia, so 
that this might be one of the reasons why it has decided to 
"soften" its attitudes toward Yugoslavia. 
  Official Belgrade has not forgotten "the extremist, 
anti-Serbian statements issued by Milan Kucan in Albania" or the 
moves made by Slovene statesmen who "instead of soothing the 
passions, stirred them up, always to Serbia's disadvantage." 
  After reporters remarked that this relatively negative 
attitude might negate the unofficial signal from Ljubljana, a 
Yugoslav diplomat said: "We do not think that there is only one 
opinion in Slovenia about Yugoslavia. Slovenia is the former 
Yugoslav republic that made the greatest effort to harm the 
Federal Republic of Yugoslavia. I am now speaking about the 
official Slovene attitude, not about the attitudes of all the 
politicians, and especially not about the attitudes of the 
Slovene people." Yugoslav diplomats have the impression that 
there are differences between Milan Kucan, the president of 
Slovenia, Lojze Peterle, the minister of foreign affairs, and 
Janez Drnovsek, the prime minister, the last being "sober, 
realistic and trustworthy." 
  The first signs of a change in the Slovene attitude toward 
Yugoslavia were noticed during the visit of Karolos Papoulias, 
the Greek foreign minister, and Vaclav Havel, the Czech 
president, to Slovenia, in November 1993. 
Diplomatic Pirouettes
  At that time the press carried statements made by Milan 
Kucan 
and Lojze Peterle that unquestionably represented a shift in 
policy toward Belgrade. Kucan said that "Slovenia never had any 
conflict with Serbia," and Peterle that "Slovenia would be happy 
if the conditions for the removal of the sanctions against 
Serbia and Montenegro were fulfilled." 
  At the beginning of December 1993, Mr. Peterle, the Slovene 
minister of foreign affairs, made that attitude concrete in a 
letter to Warren Christopher, the U.S. secretary of state, in 
which he wrote: "A possible removal of the sanctions against 
Yugoslavia is being fully considered since the aims for which 
they were introduced have not been achieved.... The European 
Union initiative makes us hope that the situation in the Balkans 
can be solved." 
  In the view of Slovene political commentators, the softening 
of the Slovene attitude toward the FRY is a part of the 
diplomatic tactics the aim of which is to adapt Slovene policy 
to the policy of the European Union, with which Slovenia is 
awaiting negotiations about associate membership. Belgrade 
diplomats agree with this assessment and claim that the first 
announcement of possible contacts between Yugoslavia and 
Slovenia were made by arrangement with Germany and Austria. 
  In the focus of Serbian attention now are relations with 
Croatia, and as far as Slovenia is concerned, the official 
proposal for the normalization of relations has to be specified 
first. Single statements and "diplomatic pirouettes" are not 
enough to overcome the present differences, including the 
Slovene attitude toward Kosovo, the interruption of economic 
relations, the way Slovene independence was achieved by force, 
and diplomatic duels on the international scene. 

Jovanovic: "Slovenia Must Excuse Itself" 
  "In order to enter the process of normalization of relations 
with Slovenia, certain conditions must be fulfilled first," 
Vladislav Jovanovic, FRY minister of foreign affairs, said in a 
statement for POLITIKA, and added: "First it is necessary for 
Slovenia to excuse itself for the rude and impertinent move it 
made a year ago in refusing the Yugoslav offer of recognizing 
Slovenia. It is further necessary that the anti-Serbian 
campaign that Slovenia has been spreading all over the world is 
ended and that it acknowledges that those who remained in 
Yugoslavia have the right to self- determination. Apart from 
that, Slovenia must stop challenging the continuity of 
Yugoslavia as a state. 
  Slovenia made a mistake by insisting that the FRY be 
excluded from all international forums. In addition, Slovenia supports 
the lifting of the arms embargo on the Bosnia- Herzegovina 
Muslims. There are many situations that prove that Slovenia has 
a hostile attitude toward Yugoslavia. We are not bothered that 
Slovenia is an independent state. On the contrary, while we 
lived together, we had excellent relations. That is why our 
surprise was great when the turnaround occurred. 
  Yugoslavia is interested in good relations with all of its 
neighbors -- old and new alike. Slovenia is no exception. We 
cannot account for the hostility that they have shown toward 
Yugoslavia and toward the people who are living in this region 
now. Official Slovenia should find ways and means to end this 
hostility. We are, of course, interested in normal relations 
between Slovenia and Yugoslavia, but some prerequisites have to 
be fulfilled," Jovanovic concluded his statement. 
</TEXT>

</DOC>

